blog: Serving Models with MLEM (#3623)
iterative/dvc.org: content/blog/2022-07-05-serving-models-with-mlem.md

---
title: Serving Machine Learning Models with MLEM
date: 2022-07-05
description: >
  Once you have a machine learning model that's ready for production, getting it

>   out can be complicated. In this tutorial, we're going to use MLEM to deploy a
>   model to an API.

Reviewer: 💅🏼 
```suggestion
  out can be complicated. In this tutorial, we're going to use MLEM to deploy a
  model as a web API.
```
?

descriptionLong: >
  Getting a machine learning model out to our end users can be an involved task.
  You have to make sure it's in the correct format for the environment and for
  the way it will be consumed. We're going to walk through how you can use MLEM
  to save your model and serve it with a web API.
picture: 2022-07-05/serve_mlem_models.png
pictureComment: Serving Machine Models with MLEM
author: milecia_mcgregor
commentsUrl: https://discuss.dvc.org/t/syncing-data-to-aws-s3/1192
tags:
  - MLOps
  - DVC
  - Git
  - MLEM
  - Collaboration
---

> Training a machine learning model is only one step in the process of getting
> something useful out to end-users. There are many goals for machine learning
> projects and we need accurate models that provide us with information based on
> the data received from a production environment. That could mean data coming
> from an API or batch processing, for example.

Reviewer: Minor, but I think something like this makes the ideas in the different sentences more cohesive:
```suggestion
Training a machine learning model is only one step in the process of getting
something useful out to end-users. When time comes to _productionize_ it, no one
approach fits-all. That's because there are many goals for ML projects; That could
mean to respond to real-time queries coming from an API or batch processing
predictions, for example.
```
Although "no one approach fits-all" is kind of what MLEM tries to address so I'm not sure about this exact phrasing.

Either way, you'll need to save your trained and validated model in a format
that's consumable by other systems. That's why we'll be covering how to serve
models through a [REST](https://restfulapi.net/) endpoint or a Python package
with [MLEM](https://mlem.ai/).

> You can get the repo we're working with
> [here](https://github.com/iterative/stale-model-example/tree/mlem-serve).

## Take a candidate model

There are instructions in the project
[README](https://github.com/iterative/stale-model-example/tree/mlem-serve#readme)

> on how to get everything you need installed and running. This is a simple ML
> project that uses DVC for data versioning and experiment tracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on how to get everything you need installed and running. This is a simple ML
project that uses [DVC](https://dvc.org/) for data versioning and experiment
tracking.
```

^ I understand the blog will be extracted from dvc.org in the near future so something to keep in mind.

p.s. consider linking "data versioning" and/or "experiment tracking" to specific docs too if it doesn't feel too crowded. Or combine into "[experiment versioning](https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/experiment-management/experiments-overview)" ™️ .

After you have the repo set up, you'll already have the `MLEM` package
installed. This project already has a model that's been trained and validated so
we can move on to saving this model.

## Save the model

Inside the `train.py` script, we need to add the `MLEM` import to save the
models as we experiment. We don't have to worry about running the training
script for this project since we have the model, but it's good to know what's
happening under the hood.

```python
# train.py
import os
import pickle5 as pickle
import sys
import yaml

from mlem.api import save
import numpy as np
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
...
```

Then you can add the `save` function to the end of the training script.

```python
# train.py
...
clf = RandomForestClassifier(
    n_estimators=n_est, min_samples_split=min_split, n_jobs=2, random_state=seed
)

clf.fit(x, labels)

save(
    clf,
    "clf",
    sample_data=x,
    description="Random Forest Classifier",
)
```

<admon type="tip">

You don't have to do these steps as we already have a model available, but if

> you want to see the training and evaluation steps in action, you can run a few
> experiments with:
> 
> ```dvc
> $ dvc exp run
> ```
> 
> This will execute the DVC pipeline and you can check out what is happening in

Reviewer: Other than the mention above (see my previous comment), I'm not sure we should mix in the concept of DVC experiments to this post, because more explaining would be required, which seems out of topic: how to update params, compare metrics/plots, etc.

````suggestion
you want to see the training and evaluation steps in action, you reproduce
the DVC pipeline with:

```dvc
$ dvc repro
```

You can check out what is happening in
````

There's a couple other mentions of DVC exps down in lines 139 and 143.

That said, if you do keep this maybe link `[experiments]` to https://dvc.org/doc/start/experiments (again) for context.

do that, you'll need to add the following import.

```python
# evaluate.py

import json
import math
import os
import sys

import pickle5 as pickle
import sklearn.metrics as metrics
import numpy as np
from mlem.api import apply
...
```

Now we can use the [`apply` function](https://mlem.ai/doc/api-reference/apply)
to make predictions with the model.

```python
# evaluate.py
...
x = matrix.iloc[:,1:11].values

cleaned_x = np.where(np.isnan(x), 0, x)
labels_pred = apply(model_file, cleaned_x, method="predict")

predictions_by_class = apply(model_file, cleaned_x, method="predict_proba")
predictions = predictions_by_class[:, 1]
...
```

The `predict` and `predict_proba` are methods available from the model and they
are used to get new predicted values and their probabilities for evaluation.
This, along with everything else in the script, is how we get the metrics for
each experiment.

</admon>

After you run an experiment, there will be two new files in your repo: `clf` and
`clf.mlem`. Make sure you add the `clf.mlem` file to your Git history with the
following command:

```dvc
$ git add clf.mlem
```

This is so that the metadata is in your repo and ready to use with other MLEM

> commands. Now we can finally take the model file and ship it to production.
> 
> ## Serve the model to production
> 
> There are a couple of ways you can do this with MLEM:
> 
> - Serve the model with [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
> - Create a Python package

Reviewer: 💅🏼 
```suggestion
commands. Now we can finally take the model file and ship it to production!

## Deploy the model to production

There are a couple of ways you can do this with MLEM:

- Serve the model with [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/).
- Create a Python package (and use or distribute it).
```

_Note:_ There is an experimental option to
[deploy the model directly to Heroku](https://mlem.ai/doc/get-started/deploying)
although this functionality is experimental and may have breaking changes.

### Serve with FastAPI

If you don't have an API to work with and don't need a Python package, you can
serve your model quickly using FastAPI with this command.

```dvc
$ mlem serve clf fastapi
```

> This will run a local server and spin up an API for you so you can quickly test
> out your model without needing a development team to work on the API initially.

Reviewer: 💅🏼 (API could be so many different things...)
```suggestion
This will run a local server and spin up a web API for you so you can quickly test
out your model without needing a development team to work on the API initially.
```

You'll see an output like this in your terminal:

```dvc
(.venv) milecia@Milecias-MacBook-Pro-2 stale-model-example % mlem serve clf fastapi
⏳️ Loading model from clf.mlem
Starting fastapi server...

> 💅 Adding route for /predict

Reviewer 2: This one was @mike0sv invention) Let's replace it with ✅ if that makes more sense :)

> 💅 Adding route for /predict

Reviewer 2: As an option, we could use something from 📡 🤖 📟 🚃 🚅

> 💅 Adding route for /predict

Reviewer 3: The fact that it has nothing to do with is exactly why I chose it. Since there is no "http endpoint" emoji I decided to use this opportunity to add some character to our console output :)

> 💅 Adding route for /predict

Reviewer: 🖇️

> 💅 Adding route for /predict

Reviewer 4: > The fact that it has nothing to do with is exactly why I chose it. Since there is no "http endpoint" emoji I decided to use this opportunity to add some character to our console output :)

I definitely like the idea of adding character to the console output!  I think using an emoji in and of itself does so.  But it should be something more related to what's happening. The ➕ would work but not be viewable.  I think the 🤖 🖇️  or 🚅  make more sense. 

It could be because I have a personal aversion to using the 💅  emoji as we do.

> 💅 Adding route for /predict

Reviewer 2: Replaced 💅 with 🖇️ in https://github.com/iterative/mlem/pull/352

💅 Adding route for /predict_proba
💅 Adding route for /sklearn_predict
💅 Adding route for /sklearn_predict_proba
Checkout openapi docs at <http://0.0.0.0:8080/docs>
INFO:     Started server process [31916]
INFO:     Waiting for application startup.
INFO:     Application startup complete.
INFO:     Uvicorn running on http://0.0.0.0:8080 (Press CTRL+C to quit)
```

> Then, when you go to the local URL, you'll see the documentation for how to use
> the model you created.

Reviewer: Maybe??? Idk
```suggestion
Then, when you go to the local URL, you'll see the
[documentation](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/features/#automatic-docs)
for how to use the model you created.
```

![FastAPI ML model deployment](/uploads/images/2022-07-05/fastapi_docs.png)

That's it! Now you know how to train a model, save it, and deploy to some
external service quickly using MLEM!

### Custom Python package

Let's take a look at making a Python package and importing it into a

> [Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.1.x/) app. To make the Python
> package, we'll run the following MLEM command.

Reviewer: 💅🏼 
```suggestion
[Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.1.x/) web app. To make the Python
package, we'll run the following MLEM command.
```

```dvc
$ mlem build clf pip -c target=build/ -c package_name=bike_predictor
```

This takes our `clf.mlem` file and generates a Python package called
`bike_predictor` in the `build` directory. When you look in your project, you
should see that new `build` folder that has all of the files you need for an
independent Python package.

To build the package, you'll need to run the following command in the `build`
directory.

```dvc

> $ python -m build --wheel

Author: I think most of the target audience will know what wheels are and if not, it's ok if they have to look it up since it's not directly related to Iterative stuff. Plus we don't want to redirect them from our site too much.
